Writing modular code is,
of course, a good thing.
And you're familiar with
that because basically,
you define procedures
when you have
code that is called
from multiple locations
in your application.
But in Fortran, you can
take that one step further.
You can actually define
those procedures in modules,
and these can be used from
multiple compilation units
even across applications.
So basically, that
saves you the problem
of having to
copy-paste procedures
between applications, which is
something that you would come
to regret at some point anyway.
It even goes a step
further in the sense
that you can also define
data types and even data,
so variables, in
modules, aggregating
everything that belongs together
into one compilation unit.
That of course is much
easier to maintain,
and of course, promotes
also code reuse.
Say we want to compute
descriptive statistics
on streaming data.
So basically we want
a running average
and the running standard
deviation as values come in.
And let's do it properly.
Let's define a module to hold
the data types and procedures
which we require.
So a module is a
compilation unit.
It starts with the
keyword "module" followed
by the name of the module.
By convention that typically
takes an _mod at the end
to make clear that it's
the name of a module.
And it ends as usual with "end
module" with the module name.
Since it's a
compilation unit, we
want to make sure that
all variables have
to be declared explicitly.
So, implicit none.
Also we want to control access
to whatever is in our module.
And by default we prefer that
everything is private, so hence
the "private" keyword.
And we'll mark everything that
should be public with "public"
explicitly.
So the one thing we define here
is a user defined type stats_t.
And that is public, so it can
be used from other compilation
units when they use this
particular module stats_mod.
It has three elements,
two reals, sum and sum2,
and an integer, n.
Of course, we need
a procedure to deal
with the new incoming data.
And that's going to
be add_stats_value.
We declare it public
and we define it
in "contains" part
of the module.
So this is quite similar to
a program unit that can also
have a contains part to
define local subroutines
and functions.
We have the subroutine
add_stats_value
and it takes a value and a stats
variable of type user defined
type stats_t.
And the intent of the
latter is of course, inout.
The value is passed as
value, because we only
want to use value, we are
not going to update it.
And then of course
sum, sum2, and n
are updated appropriately.
And that's all that this
particular subroutine
has to do.
We can now use the public data
type and the public procedure
which we defined in the stats
module in, for instance,
the program unit.
And this is done
with a use statement.
So that specifies the name of
the module and those components
in the module which we want to
use in this compilation unit.
So in this case, the
user defined type stats_t
and the subroutine
add_stats_value.
And we can declare a variable
stats which is of type stats_t.
We initialize it with values
0.0 and 0.0, floating point,
for the sum and sum2,
and 0 integer for n.
We have the loop
in which we call
the subroutine add_stats_value
with some random values which
we generate in that do loop.
When that's done, we can compute
the mean based on the sum
and the number of values, which
represent just by stats%sum
divided by stats%n.
As the code stands now, there
are in my opinion two problems.
One of them is
that you have to be
aware of the exact
definition of stats_t
in order to initialize
it properly.
So it would be a good idea
to have a subroutine that
actually initializes a variable
of type stats_t appropriately.
The other thing
is that, well, we
are computing the
mean value by hand
by dividing the sum by
the number of elements.
And of course,
that's sort of OK,
but it would be much nicer
if again, we had a function
to do that so that we could
just get the mean value
from a stats_t variable.
So now we need to have a
subroutine, init_stats,
to initialize a stats variable,
and it's defined in our module.
I'll have a look at this
definition in a minute.
But it's also used and imported
into this compilation unit.
And there is a mean_stats
function, again defined
in our module.
Let's have a look
at the definitions.
The subroutine init_stats
is pretty straightforward.
Of course, we declare
it to be public
so that it can be used outside
of this module when it's used
in another compilation unit.
And the implementation
is really simple.
So the other
function which we add
is init_stats, also
declared public.
And if we look at
the implementation,
then we see that again, it
is quite straightforward.
So basically it just
computes the mean value
as you would expect by
dividing the sum by the number
of elements seen so far.
And we use an associate
statement in order to make
the mathematics a bit more
palatable than with stats%sum
and so on, which is
kind of hard to read.
We also do a small check
to see whether we actually
have already seen a value,
because otherwise of course, we
would divide by zero.
And we would not have
any valid statistics
anyway because we didn't
have any data yet.
In practise, of course, we would
add another function to compute
the standard deviation.
And of course, that
would require that we
have at least two data points.
It makes sense to define
a subroutine, validate,
that actually checks whether
we have sufficient data
to compute either the mean
or the standard deviation.
And that's the validate
subroutine which you see here.
We won't go into the details
because there are not
many surprising aspects here.
But the point I want
to make is that this
is a subroutine which is in
fact private to this module.
So it's not required outside of
the module in the compilation
units that use this module.
So we don't declare it as
public, you can see that here.
So basically in the line that
lists all the public routines,
all the public procedures,
you find in this module,
validate is not mentioned.
As you can see,
modules make it easier
to write maintainable
code, since everything
that belongs together is
in one compilation unit.
It also promotes
reuse because it's
so easy to use a module for
multiple compilation units.